there is
no countdown for the broadcaster you get
the statement
going live in the present continuous
with a very ambiguous
icon on the screen all right guys we're
gonna have a conversation to kick this
off
about what if anything makes the west
special politically philosophically and
otherwise and i'm happy to take
questions from the audience
if there is any audience and if there
are any questions as
has become our habit in just the last
few days this is a 100
unannounced and spontaneous live stream
so melissa when did you first read
thucydides
three years ago okay melissa sitting off
camera
three years ago read through cities for
the first time and i
assume you had never heard of thucydides
before you before you met me i mean as
okay it would be one thing to say it's a
name that's never spoken on the radio or
never in newspaper headlines
but in the year 2021 in fact
the name is in newspaper headlines on
the radio all the time
so you guys uh shout out to larry first
person show up in our
in our audience spontaneous unannounced
livestream
uh in the year 2021 since joe biden came
into office there has been a lot of talk
about
the thucydides trap
as a stupid idiom and completely
needless piece of jargon
um proposing that
china and the united states have a
relationship
somehow analogous to somehow comparable
to the relation between sparta and
athens
and that there was a kind of inevitable
war looming
just because of the greatness of the two
powers contesting their their place of
the world
now i think that's ridiculous but that
is something that puts thucydide's name
uh quite literally into newspaper
headlines 2021.
i think it is really worth questioning
sincerely
from a non-fascist perspective
what what is the meaning of the west
what is special about
the west you know obviously right
wingers and neo-nazis and crap
they talk about the west as if it has
some kind of
intrinsic special moral superiority
over other civilizations and precisely
because they're willing to take that for
granted
they're not going to really examine it
in a thorough going or a sincere way
now i started off life left-wing
i was born left-wing and i was raised
left-wing
my parents were not just leftists they
were communists
and i ended up becoming a rather harsh
critic of of communism
and i grew up in the shadow of genocide
and the rise and fall of the british
empire here in canada
so it is natural as a young man that i
would be hostile to the notion that
there is anything
special about the west or western
democracy
right um so there's a comment from the
audience from sam
sam says he finds it surprising that
melissa hadn't heard of thucydides
he says he heard about the acidities in
his eighth grade
world history class that's great
where did you go to schools
i i sure was held in here i can tell you
sorry it's a whole separate story when
that i first hear about vicinities
i had a very peculiar professor in
university
who was from iran and he he did not
identify
as a refugee but he could be called an
iranian refugee
there's an interesting case you know do
you identify as male or female well
you're persecuted and you fled the
country you don't identify as a refugee
as a question but he had been uh put in
prison and tortured to some extent
in iran it was torture light you know
what i mean they didn't cut off any
fingers or toes
but he was interrogated and treated
badly in prisons there for being a kind
of dissonant
intellectual uh interesting guy
and yeah if you put his name into google
you will find out things about him so
his first name was
rameen r-a-m-i-n which is not a totally
surprising name for an iranian
and his last name is so it is unusual
for someone from iran his
last name is which is still
it's spelled more like a hindu name from
india but it's not he's iranian
um i won't digress into why
linguistically those are so similar but
they are
sanskrit is very similar to avestan
people okay i can't
i keep saying that in these livestreams
i keep doing political seriously
guys sanskrit is very similar to avesta
come on
work on etymologies people uh anyway so
rameen jahan beglu
was my professor and you know he was the
guy who introduced me to the philosophy
of max sterner
and we talked a lot one-on-one as a as
professor of student women we didn't
just talk in class or something
and i knew a lot about his personal life
and things he was one of those
professors who
took me aside and i think he was
somewhat desperate to socialize with
someone who was a real intellectual
he very explicitly told me that none of
his colleagues were none of the other
professors
were addressed in politics or philosophy
none of them were real intellectuals who
was absent
but he told me about max sterner and a
number of other philosophers i did get
interested
but i remember he was the first person
to ever mention thucydides to me
and i just completely dismissed this
video like
he's a historian he's not a philosopher
he doesn't do political philosophy i do
philosophy i do the philosophy of
politics
come on you want don't read this
historian
and he didn't push back on that you know
i remember ramin he was like oh yeah you
know you're quite right
you know like he was acting as if like
aristotle and plato
are more worthy of your attention than
to say
but yeah i hadn't read thucydides i was
just dimly aware
he was considered the father of history
you know sorry the context in which i
had first
first first first ever read the word the
name thucydides
was in the discussion and critique of
hegel
so herodotus and thucydides and that
stuff came up at that time and then yeah
so i that's also shows when i was a
young man i was hostile
to historians in the writing of history
and such and i still am
i mean it's it's very hard it's very
dangerous to recommend to a young person
that they go to the history section of
the library and get a book off the shelf
it's mostly crap
and a lot of it's propaganda and a lot
of it's misleading and ill intention and
stuff
you know i mean history as a as a
department at the university is a
parlous please to myself powerless okay
okay but i'm not done
if you don't know parlez look it up okay
anyway yeah this is a digression into
how i first
heard the name thucydides in contrast to
melissa
but as a young man i was raised to be
left wing and i became very critical of
my parents political ideology as time
went on i saw the cracks in it and so on
i am still left of center by the
american
political compass certainly i thought
we're in some very left-wing country in
europe i might not be left of center
because center is different from place
to place i don't know
i don't know how i do in sweden i
suppose i suppose well maybe we'll find
out maybe season two of a ballast y'all
will be falling
but before live studio audience too let
me get again
let's get ourselves a studio in
stockholm
i in the old days i used to have more i
used to have more
viewers per capita in sweden than any
other country
i don't think that would be true today
but back when i was doing videos about
veganism well that was the main thing
with speaking politics
uh sweden was my most overrepresented
source of minorities because their
population is small so if you if you
looked at
viewers per capita for that country they
were number one for me
um so look growing up left wing it's one
of those things where you'd say
um is there something special about the
west
and it's very easy if you are
sympathetically inclined to say no
that there's nothing special now partly
that's based on optimism like you look
at what the western world has
accomplished and you say hey
syria can accomplish that too there's
nothing there's no trick to it
the syrian people can have a democratic
pluralistic society and
uh newspapers that criticize the
government and people that stand for
we they can they can really easily catch
up with it anybody can do it right
look at the japanese or the japanese
don't share our tradition or our history
or whatever they were able to create
this modern
look at taiwan look at south korea so if
you look at it in that way you can say
look
democracy and put it this way not just
democracy
the redeeming qualities of western
civilization
were things that the japanese the
taiwanese and the south koreans
were able to generate
themselves without having access to any
kind of special
heritage or tradition uh in the western
world they certainly did it without
reading
thucydides or aristotle or plato or any
of that
so why would we delude ourselves as
the right wing or want to do as you know
especially white nationalists and
fascists and what have you and outright
uh you know racists uh i wanna want to
think that way
so that's one and you know obviously
that's not all wrong
there's some sense in which i'm
sympathetic to that and optimistically
i'd like to think
that any country in africa any country
in the middle east or something
can very easily take advantage of all
the redeeming qualities of the so-called
west
now i'm going to challenge this idea of
the west with the next example
especially
why is nexus
dramatic pause
this is unedited people this is
why is mexico so much poorer
than the united states american day why
is the quality
of government in mexico so much worse
than the united states today
all right historically guys you may not
know this mexico had silver
mexico had oil i.e gasoline mexico
has i'm going to go into linear i'm
going to say mexico has
the world's greatest climate
for agriculture find one that's better
you know they're right on that
cusp where it's not all the way tropical
but there's also not really any winter
it's that temperate
you know hot temperate climate with
great soil
right and for a lot of america's history
you know when you look at like the 13
colonies period mexico and the spanish
empire in that part they had more
population all kinds of advantage they
were part of this great world empire
that was managed quite well compared to
the american 13 colonies
mexico had all kinds of advantages say
200 years ago they had all kinds of
advantages 400 years ago too by the way
um in terms of the indigenous people you
know there were great
cities in the area that's now mexico
under indigenous people we did not have
great cities comparable to the inca and
the olmec and so on you know
uh here in west the west coast of canada
for example you know
it's a big contrast mexico seemed like
on a continental scale on eclipse you
have all these venues
why does mexico lack precisely the
advantages
that we pretend are innate
or inherent to or heart and parcel of
this thing we call the west western
civilization
now how about we get even even more
challenging
greece greece from
2008 to 2021 why is it that greece
seems to lack the advantages of of the
west right and
of course greece is a definitive part of
the west people says what greece is
about spain
you know they're these kind of sick men
of europe these kind of failed states
within western europe
and you know what we mean by the west
and the advantages of the west
actually it's you know it's quite
difficult to tease out
which i shouldn't say the statista this
is a really kind of technical jargon
it's difficult for us to really be
honest with ourselves and others what we
mean when we're talking about the
western world
let alone we get into a comparative
framework talking about japan or china
ancient and modern another great example
is india
india sri lanka wonderful all right so
i'm going to read some stuff going on
uh in the chat for a minute junebug says
good evening i wonder what time it is
there because i'm in bed well junebug
let me talk to you through this all
right
the earth may appear to the naked eye to
be flat
but it is in fact an imperfect sheer
spheroid shape passing through the
depths of space and that is why
that is why when the sun shines on one
side of the globe it is not
visible on the other it's sorry to break
this to you this is may 19 2021
but if the world were flat it would
indeed be peculiar that the sun is
shining here
and not not so lydia asks oh i and i
wonder i wonder if lydia is asking this
because she's single
lydia admitted in our last live stream
that she moved back in with her parents
and got pissed off of them and moved
back out so so lydia i am wondering if
you you have uh if you have a dog in
this fight if you say lydia asks
are you and melissa getting married any
day
soon not any times of any days hmm
so an interested and interesting
question uh another
uh profound question do you like george
carlin no
so that's it's kind of one of the weird
litmus tests i think you know
back in the old days in this channel
people used to insult me by calling me a
pseudo-intellectual which i always found
hilarious actually made some videos
joking about that what
hilarious and hollow a comment that is i
have to say i think the people who love
and look up to george carlin in this
world i think they really are
pseudo-intellectuals um and an example
would be
you know the amazing atheist the amazing
atheist wars that worships george carlin
and looks up to him and stuff
and no for someone like me george car
church colin is is really a somewhat
pitiable i mean
he's not great as a comedian he's
certainly not great as a social
commentator or
political person doesn't say what you're
trying i mean you're too young for him i
mean
you know generation
[Music]
yeah right on youtube
right well i was just melissa is 28 so
she's of the generation where george
growing was being recycled on youtube in
short clips
or something like that that's what i've
seen anyway just say no but you know in
my day
george carlin was like people actually
watched on a vhs cassette
for two and a half hours or something i
think he did hbo broadcast and stuff too
so there there was there was a time and
there was a whole generation from that
was a big deal
and you know so junebug says
melissa needs her own live stream for us
ladies junebug are you really are you
really so naive you don't think the vast
majority of melissa's viewers are men
really really really
[Laughter]
let's keep it all the way real quick
even oh oh oh i just shaved before
broadcasting so i got a little bit of a
little bit of dried blood in the end of
my channel so i'll keep my
oh gee that's not great either keep my
head looking straight
forward so you can't see the the dried
blood on my chin from shining
all right my shaving scars you might say
okay so um
what is special about the west and how
does the reading of these big definitive
tomes like thucydides aristotle and
plato
fit into that what if anything
especially was why would we look for and
why would we
discover some criterion something
special about the west
well as i got older
i didn't just become left-wing i
actually gained
a profound level of education about the
politics and history of
india the politics and history of
thailand
cambodia laos eventually china
eventually japan those are relatively
recent years really that i got into that
history um but you start to have a
comparative framework
where you will notice increasingly what
is special about those western tax those
western
sources western politics western
philosophy now if you lack that i mean
it is
it is really ridiculous whether you're
left-wing or right-wing
conservative or liberal it's ridiculous
to ask children to recognize what's
special about america
if they have nothing to compare it to
you know now even if you just have the
comparison of america and mexico if you
have a family that's going back and
forth between america and mexico
you'd start to notice some things and
appreciate things so you'll be like oh
wow
here in america people complain that the
police are corrupt
but in mexico when they talk about
police corruption it's a whole other
story so
that gives oh now you see police
corruption united states in a different
way
well people complain that this and that
doesn't work in the government in
america but people even complain the
government's going bankrupt in america
but in mexico when we talk about the
government going bankrupt
it's a whole other thing that's that's
only one comparison
right so you might start to gain some
awareness
but for someone like myself as life goes
on you know
probably i began with a comparative
awareness looking at canada versus
europe
but then with a lot of reading you're
starting to compare europe to india
you're up to well and canada uh you're
up to sri lanka
southeast asia i mean northern southeast
asia i've never been seriously
interested in places like indonesia
malaysia
just mentioned uh muslims southeast asia
does not interest me very much
but cambodia thailand laos china japan
you start
building on this way oh so now when i
read
say lord sham i just mentioned if you
guys don't know how to spell
or i come on it's the easiest chinese
name l-o-r-d
space s-h-a-n-g if you check wikipedia
you get an okay article and look like
it's
it's not genius but you will there is a
respectable wikipedia article telling
you
lord shang is one of the most famous
influential political philosophers
in the history of chinese politics or
philosophy or both or the history of
chinese history itself
when you are reading lord sean there are
a lot of really important themes and
questions
that are just totally absent
you know and those themes and questions
in the ancient greek literature and the
ancient roman literature are
present they're prominent they're a big
deal
now you know you guys might feel this
way about an issue like slavery
or whether or not women have the right
to vote like you could be reading any
ancient texts and be like well why
aren't they talking about slavery or why
aren't they talking about women having
the right to vote
and you know with a lot of western
attacks european tax or something it
might be in there it's kind of something
briefly mentioned or covered up or
something
of course there are some that deal with
in depth you might be disappointed if
you're reading
uh political philosophy from any given
century it's like well what seems to us
as modern readers to be such a prominent
important thing you know in the chinese
texts in the text from ancient india so
on and so forth
in all of the non-western texts
including of cheese we're not even
dealing with the islamic world
didn't you i didn't include arabia in
this woo which i have studied by the way
again shout out to professor rameen
jahan beglu
professor romine beglu from iran he was
my first professor
teaching me about the politics of the
muslim world and i said that
intentionally so that included
saudi arabia iran iraq you know
i admit we didn't include indonesia it
didn't include it didn't go all the way
out to the furthest limits we didn't do
northwest africa
but it was a large part of the muslim
egypt made a big impression on me
studying politicians yeah so if you want
to talk about the history of
so-called muslim jurisprudence and these
kinds of things and make that comparison
why is it that it's just in this one
special place in the world that we
really have this
profound tradition of thinking about and
examining
like one how is government supposed to
work
and then two what is the role of the
people
in it now we could digress here that the
concept of the people
is not the same at all times in all
places it's not the same in all cultures
it moves around
uh you know during the period of time
when the american revolution
unfolds and the drafting the american
constitution it is obvious to everyone
that the people only includes christian
white men and a small number of people
were challenging that there were people
who were
in favor of uh equality for blacks there
were people who were in favor of
equality for women
but the the vast majority of people
participate in those
debates their idea of the people was
some people not others
now the other thing in the british
tradition american edition is also the
property qualification
they were deeply committed to the idea
that people who were poor
people who did not own property did not
deserve to have a voice in government
okay so
you can note that too but
back in athens and back in rome
they were deeply committed to the idea
that the people
even the poor had to have some
stake in government they had to have
some kind of positive role in positive
involvement in government
so to be fair to rome i often say that
rome was sort of much worse than athens
in every way as a system of
political government and i sometimes say
that because that's how i feel
but you know rome didn't just have the
tribunes
to represent the poor so there were the
tribunes of the poor for the poor or
whatever you want to say
there were these representatives of the
poor the tribunes reported back to a
type of
parliament or a type of pinnix or a type
of
plenary that was for the poor they had
their own
congress if you like for the poorer
classes
that would mean now to my knowledge
there's relatively little documentation
that because history was written by the
rich
but it's sort of mentioned in passing
it's like oh yes
the tribune arrived kind of with
this these notes having been gathered
from the meeting with the poor you know
that there was this separate kind of
congress or senate for the poor
now its only formal power was to
have the tribune uh or tribune's plural
represent their interests in front of
the senate to come and veto what was
going on and debate it
however you can imagine informally they
had all kinds of power because if they
want to they can burn the city down
they get already they can they can burn
the city down they can sabotage the war
or whatever
they can be the difference between
winning or losing a war or the economy
succeeding or failing so you know the
senate knew even if they worked through
the tribunes as intermediaries they had
to
placate and make uh you know make happy
this reputation poor
now okay so we're already getting at
part of my answer this question
without assailing the history of chinese
political philosophy the history of
muslim political philosophy but
guys it's all bad i mean if you want to
take the time if you want
i enjoy reading lord sean i enjoy
reading anyone who said oh yeah the
philosophy lord sean still has like
meaning and applicability today
you have to be insane you have to be
insane i mean
the political and philosophical history
of china is
only worth studying to understand
why china was so screwed up in the way
it was
in past centuries it's important for
understanding history and it has
absolutely no value
to add to our political organization or
function none
zero now i would say the same about
muslim jurisprudence
we tend to always say jurisprudence
rather than political science in the
islamic world but yeah you want to know
how sharia law works
melissa was just reading about that in
central asia was
what's your impression i mean you know
the only people who think that stills a
place in the modern world are isis
are the really extreme islamic
terrorists they they want to go
back to sharia law and rule by muslim
jurisprudence it was absolutely terrible
and
by the way india and pakistan
they're very much part of that history
too linguistically and culturally
different but they also have their own
history this kind of terrible
uh brutality of muslim rule so look
uh oops turn the light off nice in there
um okay i'll glance at some uh glance at
some
uh questions from the audience here
before we proceed
[Music]
yes i got a question what do you think
of nathan rich
is he thinking of the chinese rapper
remember that guy
yeah oh rich bryant no okay i've nev
to my knowledge i've never heard the
name nathan ridge before whoever asked
the question
oh we have a profound uh question about
what does that mean and the next
question is tearing down the walls
i think that's a provocative suggestion
but no
uh it does not mean terri terry nineves
it has this sense of being like uh
terror heaven out of the sky so very
literally
yeah to tear down the sky but yeah this
sense of tear down heaven or
tear heaven on the sky and um it was a
political slogan at several different
points
in uh french political history you know
chanted in protests and comes up
spontaneously because
people would sometimes say about it
tear down the government tear down the
state and sometimes they say tear down
the church or tear down a particular
leader
you know abba la blanc uh you got a
different thing
but then the more extreme form whatever
people were saying was about the ciel
so i know i'm not chanting about i'm not
saying i don't want to take down the
current government
i want to take heaven out of the sky you
know so we get an answer about nathan
rich so i just say
it it comes up as a sort of
intentionally exaggerated political
slogan
in different french revolutions and
uprisings so we get an answer nathan
rich is a political commentator on china
on youtube he is essentially a
spokesperson for the ccp
well i probably i'm not very sympathetic
i mean the other problem is look
the communist party itself is one thing
the freelance propaganda people do on
its behalf when they're pandering to
what the con
what they think the communist party
wants to hear is really really bad
if you want to read real communist party
uh
propaganda the website to look up is
chosha
q-i-u-space s-h-i
most most western people don't know
about that but there is an english
language edition of chosha
and that is the official political
science journal political philosophy
journal
of the government of china where they
tell you what they want you to think
and in some ways it's very honest
i mean i know that's going to sound
weird but you know i mean
honesty comes from strength right and
when you're in a position of
unassailable power
you can be honest with people because
you know they can't they can't hurt you
there can't be any negative consequences
so you know uh you will actually find a
lot of strange honesty in the pages of
uh chosha magazine about what's going on
that you can learn something from that
but watching these guys whether they're
white guys or chinese immigrants united
states of america who are
out here doing freelance work it's
really bad
you don't uh you know yeah so
somebody is saying there's a lot of this
oh shout out to melora shout out to
everyone showing up be honest
i always wonder i wonder if anyone will
ever for anyone if this will be their
first introduction to my channel if
anyone will show up and watch one of
these live streams
where are the entire audiences normally
it's comprised of people who've already
known me for like
seven years you know there are people uh
people who've
known me for so many years and by the
way also i mean i uh
i'm sympathetic to this i say this years
ago on the channel there are people who
have spent more time
listening to my voice than they've spent
listening to their cousins or nieces or
nephews or even their brothers or
sisters voices like you think about in
the last five years
how many hours have you spent listening
to a ballast yell how many hours you
spent listening to your brother
talk about politics talking about his
life talk about anything so i know i
know there are people in the audience
who've really
really gotten to know me but anyway yeah
but i would be interested no for anyone
they're they're
stepping in uh midstream uh in more ways
than one
okay so look um
what makes the west special or in what
sense should we grudgingly admit
that the west is special well i think
what most people
want to overlook or not want to deal
with is exactly the issue of social
class
in the history of uh ancient rome
and ancient greece now the idea of
social class
has become tarnished because marxists
won't shut up about it and marxist won't
stop
justifying mass murder with it right
a lot of ideas get discredited by mass
murder
but when you're talking about social
class in aristotle or
cicero or thucydides you know whether
it's ancient athens or ancient rome you
are not talking about the marxist idea
of social class
you're not talking about marxist excuses
for massacring
massacring and persecuting people being
socialized nor are you talking about
ideas
that came out of the french revolution
you know prior to marxism but still many
many centuries countless centuries after
uh ancient greece in ancient rome so
today we talk about the people
and then we sometimes talk about
particular elites
now it is peculiar that in the american
tradition and the american tradition has
now influenced the whole world
governments do not think they need to
have representation for elites
and they should just to give you an
example
how many surgeons are represented in
government
how many nurses are represented in
government those are people with
special expertise and right now
look what's happening in the world in
2021 the opinions and perspectives of
doctors and nurses are really important
well you should probably have
seats in parliament or seats in your
congress that are reserved
to elect a certain number of senior
experienced
medical professionals it probably in
several different areas of expertise
and they probably should be elected not
appointed and they should have to debate
you know he should have elections where
they say oh no i think i'm the best
surgeon to represent the people's
interests
and they'll say i'm not corrupt i didn't
sell out to the pharmaceutical companies
like you did
they should probably get up there and
really dispute that so my point is here
elites are not necessarily evil and
having representation
for political elites in government is
not necessarily evil
we do not have that in any of the modern
so-called democracies so-called
representative democracies raising the
question of who are you representing
you know if you have a system of
congress or a system of parliament
that only represents wealthy lawyers
what the hell is the point of having a
representative government and i'm sorry
let's keep it straight bill clinton and
his wife
were both wealthy lawyers now in my
opinion
based on i also think they were
genuinely corrupt genuinely criminal
lawyers i've made a couple of videos
that i do believe
uh i do believe some of the bad things
people say
about bill clinton and hillary clinton
by the way it doesn't mean he was a bad
president
i mean he's a terrible human being now
when you look back at the 20th century
compare bill clinton to you know ronald
reagan or george w
bush just like nobody is going to
remember bill clinton is the worst
president of his of his era or of his
century he's going to
obviously he's going to be remembered
relatively positively in terms of this
issue
terrible terrible human being though and
my point is just
if you have a system of government that
only represents that one elite that only
represents
uh corrupt lawyers or wealthy lawyers uh
or any of them are any of them really
untainted by corruption the people who
get elected where
are the medical doctors where are the
nurses where are the school teachers
where are the university professors
those are all people with particular
vested interests and perspectives
where are certain kinds of scientists
whose opinions you might really want to
represent in government how about people
who know about sewage treatment
you know or the environment under a
couple different headaches you might
think about those
those might be people you want to have
in the room and
elected not appointed because if you
appoint them you're just going to
appoint people who agree with what the
government already wants to do
what about people who are experts in
fishing and fisheries i'm vegan
from as far as i'm concerned we can
abolish fishing but you might have
people who know about
fishing and hunting and habitat
conservation we have none of that
the only form of expertise we have is
exactly the kind of expertise
bill clinton had again and again and
again and what you get across the
spectrums are different flavors of bill
clinton you get a relatively left-wing
bill clinton and a relatively right-wing
bill clinton
but all of them have come out of this
same kind of elite law school background
uh again and again yet so this is now
i'm only talking about the upper half
of representation right where is the
representation for the poor
right where is the representation for
indigenous people
for first nations for the navajo for the
cree for the ojibwe
you know where you know and it never has
been there i mean historically you go
back over the decades and centuries
it's not just that it's not there it's
the this ain't something new that just
came a number
gee we call this representative
government nobody is representing that
interesting
there's no actual interest in
representation or who's being
represented or
or why hmm interesting so maybe we don't
have representation or representation of
maybe we have senatorial government
and who and what is the senate is worth
talking about but this is my point
when we look back at the the uniqueness
of the west of what made the west
special as a political idea or political
movement
when we look at thucydides and we look
at rome also
right we're looking at societies that
self-consciously and intentionally
design their systems of government to
represent multiple social classes
these are the rich these are the poor
and these are several gradients
of rich and poor in between now they
also sorry in athens especially
in rome was a little bit different but
not that much different but in athens
they
also divided each of the social strata
into tribes and when people are first
reading ancient greek texts like
aristotle they're discussing this
they don't really know what the truth
what the word tribe means it doesn't
mean tribalism in our sense it was a
quite artificial thing
you were basically different
neighborhoods or whatever had different
teams
invented to represent them in government
so you had an affiliation with your
social class which very explicitly meant
your level of wealth
and you had this kind of this deem
identity
this affiliation with your neighborhood
with your tribe
and again it's a totally phony
government-created tribe where just
everybody gets assigned to a different
tribe kind of thing
it doesn't represent your ancestry or
your ethnicity or whatever
and then also you know you would all
your life carry a special fraternity a
special brotherhood
because of the year that you commenced
doing your military service
the men who were inducted into the
military who served in the military
starting the same year you did you
remember that
oh i started in the year such and such
when so and so was in charge of the army
he swore me into the army and you carry
and you met with those guys and had
lunch with them every so often
lunch or dinner but you had ceremonial
occasions where you met up with your war
buddies your whole life so already you
get the sense of how powerful the social
cohesion was the bonds of sentiment
think of this
okay now why
why did they have this system of
different social strata
being represented in government okay it
was not out of the goodness of their
hearts it was
not because of some kind of marxist
theory about
i don't know what's good for the rich
you're good for something
it wasn't out of zone okay it
fundamentally
was about taxation and
motivating people to pay their taxes now
maybe there is some exception to the
generalization i'm going to make i'm
going to tell you something i don't
know it most societies all over the
world
societies other than athens and rome
most of them had a fundamentally
punitive system
of taxation where you have some kind of
despot or tyrant
who's trying to tax you and if you don't
pay your taxes
he's going to beat you up or he's going
to put you in prison or he's going to
steal your wife or something
where it is based just on coercion
and threat now in the ancient world
there are no computers right there are
no credit cards
there's no way to really track and trace
what you're buying and selling
it's not easy for the government in the
ancient world to say okay
well you're a farmer this is how many
tons of wheat you produced and this is
how much that's worth and here's the
percentile value of the tax you should
be paying
that kind of calculation is very very
difficult to do even if people are being
honest with you
and they're not people are going to lie
obviously the easiest thing in the world
whether you are mining in gold or
farming olives off of your olive tree
the easiest thing in the world to do is
to lie about how much money you're
making how much you're farming
how much wool you are spinning how many
clothes you're producing how many
sales you are sowing out of hemp what is
the financial value of the pots
you are baking in an oven how is the
government going to
tax you well one answer is the majority
of planet earth majority history was
the government is going to terrorize you
the government is going to interrogate
you and threaten you with torture
and they're going to send soldiers every
so often and they are going to try to
force you to pay your taxes
out of fear that if you don't comply
your life will be wrong
that is one answer okay and the answer
that athens and rome
came up with instead is you should be
proud to pay your taxes because we have
at any given time it's something like
five
or six social strata it's a little bit
different five
six or seven levels of how wealthy you
are
and if you're in one of those middle
levels and you start making
more money you should be proud
to honestly account how much money you
have and then start paying the higher
level of taxes so that you can move up
in the political system to being
represented
in that level of government see ah
now now we see why now we see why
the people in rome
and athens were divided into social
classes
and why they competed with another one
of them they vied with one another
to move up the ladder and to pay more
taxes
so uh we even see this with burials in
terms of archaeology
you know the best evidence you can ever
get is a tombstone and this kind of
thing they really last through history
we have tombstones of people who say
proudly i was
born or okay this is actually a real
example i remember reading this
book anyway i was born in the second
lowest social class you know so there's
like the absolute poorest report i was
one up from that
and i worked hard and this was my
business and this is my uh
i did x y and zed in the marketplace and
by the time i died i had gotten up to
the highest social class i had moved up
the ranks you know this is business
he was proud of this it was what was
inscribed in rock on his tombstone
i was gonna say sometimes you have other
stories where it's like hey my father
was born in the lowest class i moved up
to social classes and my son he's going
to be
in the in the eckhaus or whatever he's
going to be a knight he's going to be a
horseman whatever right
and your social class it was reflected
in again sometimes who you ate lunch
with who you ate dinner with
what ceremonial occasions you attended
what uh
festivities and religious occasions you
attended or if the same festivity was
happening everywhere you wouldn't go to
the celebration for the plebs for the
poor
you'd go to this one for the for the
elite you get to go to different dinner
parties
which by the way you can see that
already in plato
they cared a lot about going to fancy
dinner parties people people still do it
doesn't make sense
you would get to go to different kinds
of social occasions you'd be recognized
away you would get to participate in
government inform government
uh in a different way and the biggest
one of all right is military service
because that ultimately that's where the
ego trip stops
right now we're talking about life and
death right
so if you were in a lower social class
you might be stuck rowing the boat right
it's a good exercise right okay but
these are ancient times you might be
one of the guys on the oars right in a
tyrami rowing about you might have a
lower
duty in the military if what you wanted
you know maybe you don't want this but a
lot of people do
if what you wanted was to wearing a
gleaming beautiful
suit of armor and to go into battle in
at cape if you wanted to have that
aristocratic bearing in war
and do those aristocratic things and
those those higher duties
and now you know you tell me whether
your chances of surviving
are greater or worse um
i would imagine anyway you might die on
more dignified death
when it came to war ah now your social
class matters and it doesn't just matter
for you it matters for your sons
right because your son like if you're
already a middle aged man your sons are
going to go to war if you're an old man
right your sons and your grandsons
it matters for your daughters because it
changes who your daughters get to marry
these were totally gender unequal
societies don't get me wrong but the
single most important thing in a woman's
life was
who she would get to marry so if you
move up in social class
oh yeah you know um
so yes people did move up and people did
move
down um it always stuck with me that it
was said
of cilla the dictator really his name is
sulla
so s-y-l-o-a or s-u-l-a
that he was born to rented
rooms on an upper floor
so in rome they did have apartment
buildings
i don't know if they went up three
floors or four floors i don't think they
could go up 10 stories or something they
didn't have the technology for that
but if you lived in an apartment in
ancient rome
the most desirable place to be was on
the ground floor
and the reason for that was water if you
lived on the upper floor
you were constantly going downstairs to
get a bucket of water and there were no
plastic buckets
this would be an earthenware jar a heavy
jar
you have to fill it with water you have
to go up this is good exercise
but this was a mark of poverty urban
poverty that sola became the dictator
who became the leader of rome one of the
most influential
but he was born to rented rooms on an
upper floor
so yeah there was there was social
mobility and there was uh there was
pride
um in being able to move up and to do
that you had to pay more taxes
right so if you lived out in the middle
of the jungle so to speak if you had no
contact if you weren't downtown in
athens or downtown in rome
if you lived out in in the wilderness
somewhere and you were making a lot of
money
again hashtag not vegan if you were
making a lot of money
raising sheep and then taking the wolf
from the sheep and processing the wolves
you could have a business out somewhere
that has no contact with the urban city
you can lie to everyone about how much
money you make you could stockpile a
huge amount of a fortune in
gold coins or whatever the medium is you
know and nobody knows about it and
you're not celebrated not respected
but if you want to be celebrated and
respected in the society of your fellow
man
ah now you have to come to the city and
the proof of how much money you make is
that you pay taxes
so again you guys whatever if it's ten
percent say oh yeah well i made
a million dollars okay well you prove
that by paying your ten percent of money
you pay that by making your contribution
and by the way i have seen different
indications of this
to my knowledge when you're talking
about ancient greece in rome
the amounts of money were not fixed in
percentages this way
to my knowledge maybe some new research
has shown this has shown something else
on this
but normally i believe it was fixed in
military terms that it was like
you have to give enough money for a suit
of armor
to completely armor furnish with arms
and armor one
uh one hoplite or you have to give
enough
you have to either give us a war horse
or enough money to buy and raise like to
add a horse there
that the the levels of taxation were in
this way palpable things the military
needed
like i you would pay money but the
amount of money being paid
uh would be in this way linked to
military sums
maybe now there's been some new uh you
know
one other thing before we go on uh
machiavelli
who's much more important for the
political history of the west than
anyone wants to admit he was
you know uh and this is the book to read
by machiavelli
you won't read it cover to cover because
not every just being honest not every
page of it is interesting
but so maybe 25 of this is really
interesting and 75
of it you're going to flip through but
the 25 percent of interesting is really
interesting
machiavelli's discourses on livy a much
more important book
than uh the prince by maggie
um and long if i had the prince out here
it looks like a pamphlet by contrast
you know machiavelli is alive at a time
when he said
quite correctly that the era of
city-states is now over
that the era of the world being ruled by
tiny places like athens
and uh rome is now over that we're going
to live in an era
now with large countries like france or
germany
in the united states and his reasoning
for this is interesting
his reasoning is that it's because of
artillery
that now we have artillery shells that
can go a long way
so it is impossible for a wall the
city-state like athens was
to be of any importance or security you
can't do that anymore now you have to
have the country
ah okay so interesting interesting
perspective for machiavelli
here's the counter argument
places like athens and rome precisely
because they were
small in this way had almost infinite
tax revenue
because they were taxing all the trade
that came in and out of the city
so just says the most common pattern in
economic development
what people call third world development
city is uh the center periphery
pattern right you see this all over the
world you see this even within the
united states of america or canada
normally you have one city that's
wealthy and that's where the harbor is
or that's where the trade is
so if you have a landlocked country
it'll be the city that's on the train
line
it's where or on the river where the
boats
you know unload and where the train
loads up and stuff this is true of laos
by the way
the only money is on the train line on
the river um where the where the river
meets the train line effect
but anyway but with most countries that
are not landlocked okay so there's one
there you got one or two cities that are
on the coast and that's where all the
boats
dump their goods and load up to leave
with other goods and at that point
where trade takes place at the harbor um
then there's all this tax revenue for
the government
coming in and out right and then the
periphery
you have a rural hinterland that is more
or less deprived more or less poor
so in a modern country like canada how
is it that electricity
and running water and so on are provided
to our rural periphery well we tax the
people
in the big city and then we spend that
tax money improving life
for people on the rural periphery this
is in third world countries
it's a real struggle and you get into a
lot of problems
because of the extremes of wealth and
poverty can be difficult for everyone to
endure
this will you solve this problem
with a city city like athens ancient
greece because all the tax money
just stays there in athens there are
people in the surrounding periphery
there are people in biosha that's the
british pronunciation
of beosho ridiculous mispronunciation
but anyway the actual greek
pronunciation system
anyway there are people in surrounding
provinces attic provinces and
beosha and so on these other surrounding
principalities
and they're farming and they're
producing
finished goods they're manufacturing
things and they're bringing those things
to athens to be sold or to be exported
some of those things are going to be
exported egypt and they're going to
import things for me
and all the tax revenue is being
generated in athens and it's all being
spent in athens they're droning in tax
money they have lots of money to spend
right and that role peripheral gets
nothing right well
they get the you know the farmers get
the money there but they're not
producing
a wealthy government with those
advantages so this is also a big part of
i mean
look why was athens successful this also
explains why they were a failure you
know like they were in some ways really
successful
and they were in some ways failure this
formula
had some advantages and disadvantages
now so machiavelli
is the turning point once you recognize
that okay so machiavelli is alive in
italy
at a time when italy is divided into
these small principalities
like venice and florence they're bigger
than city-states they're not just a city
but they're a city with a little bit of
surrounding surrounding countryside one
that still exists today by the way guys
is uh san marino so if you guys know the
tiny state of
san marino um we got some little bee
fans in the audience someone who
remembers my videos but
those are i could unlist my videos but a
little bit i could self-censor
[Laughter]
um so machiavelli is living at the end
of this
period of history and uh saying well we
need to expand in that large
principalities large countries right
well when you do that now the wealth
and tax revenue you're generating now
that is going to be dissipated so you
you still are generating the wealth and
tax revenue in a few places a few places
like new york city and boston at the
united states
a few places like athens and rome but
even today even modern greece
they don't have enough tax money today
greece is still teetering on the edge of
bankruptcy
well still the same harbor socrates
used to walk around and philosophize
that the perez harbor in athens
that is still their biggest harbor
that's where all their economic activity
is
that's where the chinese ships land and
unload their goods
and put them onto a train line that goes
straight north by the way
you know that's it you've got this one
little place to generate some wealth the
rest of
greece is poverty-stricken slight symbol
and thessaloniki i guess has a little
bit of money
but most of greece most of the interior
is poor
and they've got to take this tax money
generated from just one
place of that you know we've got to
build schools everywhere now we've got
to build hospitals every now we've got
to provide doctors and nurses everywhere
so this is also a very fundamental
difference in terms of
tax revenue so i mean you know the basis
for
government the basis for politics isn't
voting
it isn't popular democracy isn't
sovereignty it's taxation government
comes from taxation right
that's it and that's also the difference
between having a government
and just having a tribe you can have a
tribe of
people that you know we did for
thousands of years and a few places in
the world
there's no taxation there's compulsory
military service and everyone has to do
whatever the tribal chieftain
says and so there's you know you can
call this a government
but the fundamental difference is there
is neither liberty
nor taxation
when you have government the government
says you in fact do whatever you want
you have freedom
but whatever you do we're going to tax a
percentage of it and with that
you know this is very different from
living in a tribal society where you
don't have the freedom to do whatever
you want to do
and your labor is directly compelled
by your political leaders the tribal
chiefs and or religious leader or
whatever it may be
so that is that is the fundamental shift
to government so that is my athens the
riddle
sorry that is my athens fair enough
that is my solution to the riddle of
what is so special
about the western world in terms of
democracy we went through
these phases of development so i was
gonna say uh
you know thucydides for me personally
is a big part of this of understanding
this reading through cities and through
cities is anti-democracy
by the way through city is one of the
many authors who was just constantly
saying
democracy is bad and wrong he's telling
you all the disadvantages of democracy
is the world's
harshest critic of democracy but we can
still read it and see
the advantages of markets we can see how
important it is but you know
melissa was with me when i read this
book
by the guy with such a long name numa
jesus christ am i going to get this
guy's name right
uh the ancient city
his name right numa
denistel
is a very long name for a book i am not
recommending this book really i'm really
not
but i just mentioned that's a book oh i
could digress a little bit with the
contrast of this month thesis
okay so let's let's just reset my thesis
real briefly here you know
when you look at china when you look at
india
when you look at non-western
civilizations that have a
well-documented
political history where we have writing
about what happened there over centuries
and over thousands of years because you
don't have that for the world
cambodian political history is
relatively brief
um we have to guess what was going on in
cambodia phone years ago for just a few
pieces of stone that are inscribed okay
look at the philippines huge inhabited
area you say still a huge percentage of
the human beings on planet earth are
filipino
but good luck figuring out i mean we
don't have a literature
of political philosophy from the
philippines but i'm i'm guessing it
wasn't good
i mean i'm you know but so we don't have
this kind of record that we have for
greece
china india and so in japan it could be
on this list too or something right
when you look at these other non-western
civilizations i am saying
they did not go through this unique
developmental
stage that happened in athens and rome
largely by accident i'm sure you know we
could get into the different factors
that
why it happened and what happens but
whatever where
they started a stratified system of
representational government they started
having democracy
yes which was taxing people in this way
and positively motivating people
to pay their taxes by recognizing their
social status and government accordingly
so it was a dynamically unequal
system of democracy it wasn't democracy
on the basis of
of human equality it was democracy
based on a kind of voluntary inequality
because they
wanted you to voluntarily pay your taxes
in a time when there were no bank
accounts
and there were no credit cards there was
no way to track and trace how much money
you were spending or earning they wanted
you to step up and in this in a sense
pay as much as you could in taxes uh
george
so those those factors came together and
then
people started philosophizing about it
and to keep it all the way real with you
i
feel like the most brilliant minds in
rome
never really understood what athens had
done right i'm just being honest with
you i don't think anyone in realm ever
really
got it all the way anyway the guy with
the uh the long name
i just mentioned oh i'm gonna read some
questions from the from the audience
guys i see you
i see you uh see you buzzing in here be
honest
numa denistel de colons
he instead prevents a pardon me
he instead presents a developmental
model of how we ended up with greek
and roman civilization and it's
significant to note he tries to claim
that india
had the same thing which it doesn't i
mean it's
it's just it's just dishonest but he
tries to claim that india
ancient india and ancient iran
had the same develop now
ethno-linguistically there are reasons
to link those places together
um this came up earlier in the video you
know guys sanskrit and avestan are more
closely related languages
pali and latin are more closely related
i think pali and
greek are more close yeah so there are
there are kind of
ethno-linguistic reasons why he would
make the hypothesis but he was
actually claiming that greece rome
ancient india and ancient iran i totally
disagree with this
hypothesis that what they had in common
was this religious
development and then he starts tracing
out in a frankly dishonest and
cherry-picking way
distinctive elements of religion how
religion operated at the
individual level at the family level
then at the community level like the
neighborhood level and then at the city
level and
the national level and say okay so this
is how the whole society fit together
so uh and one of the things to say about
uh pneuma denis fustel de colons this
this author
his later books are only in french
i believe they've never been translated
into english so
i assume his later works when he was an
older man or probably more mature and
more intelligent he was relatively young
when he had this hit book
that is my guess i would be interested
to know what his later work is like but
i haven't read it i've only read this
one famous
early book and i mean if you know enough
about ancient greece in rome it's a
fascinating exercise to
go through what he says and how he
presents and misrepresents these things
about uh
religion and society and politics but
it's a kind of religion first analysis
that people participated in
uh politics through their religion if
you like what is largely true
religion was a huge factor right there
and uh
yeah it's fascinating i also think it's
totally wrong
i think his hypothesis in that book i
think what he's arguing is wrong and how
he argues it is misleading
but nevertheless i probably um refined
my own view i sharpened my own claws
against the rock
of uh denis fustel de colanges uh work
on that
because it is a compendious work and you
know a lot of the stuff he quotes
i've read before he's quoting a lot of
stuff out of plutarch and i wish i read
in like
1997 or 1999 or something
but a lot of it is quoting sources oh he
quotes thucydides too by the way this is
stuff taking out the cities
so a lot of it was like oh yeah right i
remember
when they said that about sparta and i
don't know what's in that
but yeah that's a that's a very
different approach um
you know and i just mentioned briefly
this is a challenge if anyone's really
interested in anthropology or kind of
anthropological approach to politics
you know religion is a big deal you know
uh if you want to understand politics of
egypt today or saudi arabia
yeah you know religion is a big deal you
could say that about texas religion
appeal but you know it's not the only
way to approach those issues
i think you can get a really brilliant
explanation of the unique
democratic form of government in athens
and rome
by looking at theater
do you want do you want to grab that
book for me babe we haven't it's not
that i guess i don't want to wrap that
book we have a book right now on uh on
theater
i shouldn't wrap it because i haven't
read it yet it's probably a mediocre
book
but anyway you know if you look at how
the greeks organized
theater how they organized sports
olympic sports it was voting
at sport competitions there was voting
at the theater
right and then you look at how they
organize juries and trials
wow we've got a powerful explanation
here for how the whole society worked
right
so you have a society unlike china
unlike india unlike japan
where their idea of a concert
is a competition between multiple
musicians and the audience
votes on who gets the laurel and who
went voting
that audiences vote on music that their
idea of theater
you know comedy this is also true of
tragedy but comedy
you'd have several different comedies
performs and the audience
votes right on who was the best
performance
and now you look at how juries how
trials how murderer and you know
the vast majority of cases were not
murder of course they'd be uh
two business associates and one
backstabbed the other
one didn't pay his desk the other let
the other down so you're explaining a
complex
business relationship to an audience
of like 500 people that hundreds of
people in a jury
and the audience votes and then you look
at the panics their version of the
parliament
and the audience votes so this is a much
more powerful explanation than the
religious approach
of pneumonia fustel it's my theatrical
approach and now we could see something
similar mutatus mutandus about rome
but maybe you could also make the
argument that one of the reasons why
democracy was weaker in rome
was that this tradition was weaker so in
greece they had the olympic games
those are the ones that are famous they
also had the delphic games they had many
different
games the delphi games were just as
important but probably more important
the olympic games
basically they had these sporting events
you know you can look at that they had
the theater and all this other stuff
just talk about
rome had gladiatorial games
a little different you know
i do think the gladiatorial games
influenced they were both influenced by
an influence
so let me just let me just say this too
um
i do think you get a powerful insight
into political organization and
political philosophy in a society
by looking at the police the prisons the
judges
the juries the trials
chinese political philosophy is very
much
interested in training the judge
right the magistrate if you like
the professional politician the
professional bureaucrat in china
is a judge and chinese
philosophers and authors and educators
whether we're talking about confucius
we're talking about sunza
they are really part of the process of
training good men to take on the
extraordinary role
of being a scholar bureaucrat who can
sit in
judgment on his filament to be a judge
this involves executing people
practically every sentence
in ancient china ended either with you
being executed with you being tortured
or you being tattooed on your face
and sent off to live a life of slavery
so the stakes are high
and their idea of being a good judge is
of being
intellectually pure ritually pure like
performing a lot of rituals
knowing poetry and literature and
refining your sentiments
having a certain kind of sympathy and
compassion
they're concerned with that like it's
not their idea of a good judge
is not of a cruel and callous person
there's a lot about
sentimentality and you know and again
when i say religious
purity sorry but no offense if you
haven't really studied ancient china you
have no idea what i'm talking about
the the chinese the ancient chinese idea
of religious period it's not like muslim
purity it's not like christian purity
it's not like jewish beauty
they have a totally different you know
taoist
and animist sense this ancient chinese
religious sense
which also isn't buddhist by the way
it's very different from buddhism of
what
what religion means and what being a
good man means so they are interested in
there and there is an intellectual
component to that
just just being literate in classical
chinese is a huge intellectual challenge
and these men are supposed to be at this
advanced level of literacy where they're
reading
you know this poetry so they are
interested in cultivating
you to be a judge to be a scholar
bureaucrat now
i think it could be said if we want to
say something flattering about the
chinese tradition
it's something totally lacking in the
west
what anyone can be a judge here any
can go to law school and become a
judge we don't care
we don't expect the judge to be a good
person you know what i mean it's just
terrible
now and if you think uh civilian trials
are a joke take a look at the military
tribunal system what a joke we have no
interest in the judge being a good
person
we have no interest in the jury being a
good person do we care if the lawyers
are a good person there are some kind of
minimum standards and practices for
lawyers you know what i mean um they're
we're really reckless
on that issue which i think is of of
central importance
uh to the chinese tradition now again in
athens we say this very clearly rome is
maybe
a little bit more of a mixed case
because in many ways roman government is
like a kind of
decayed corrupt decrepit second-rate
imitation of athenian government okay
but in athenian government it's
completely clear
anyone anyone who has done his military
service and become a citizen
so these are all men and they're not
slaves and they've done their time in
the army
if you've done any time in the army you
can be in the panics
you can be in government you can be a
judge and who is the judge should be
selected at random
and you can be in the jury at random
that's a profound part of the athenian
tradition right that randomness
sortition they even use the kind of
machine
uh it's not worth describing but you
know that you would be randomly assigned
to the jury you'd be randomly assigned
to be a judge
and there were all kinds of situations
where even the kind of magistrate in
charge the kind of president
for a certain kind of political meeting
would be assigned at random too or
positions of political power
some of them lasting one day some of
them lasting one year
would be assigned at random so that
sense of equality
and randomness you know that is you know
that is something that mattered so
uh francisco i do take the time to talk
to people in the audience
and you know guess what bro like you
know i can ban you
like i don't really get what the point
is of interrupting i do read the
comments of
not often people are not really asking
all the time really meaningful and
salient comments
or i should you know where i should stop
what i'm doing
uh you know to you know uh
to answer them you know it's fine but
you know i mean like you know sir just
look you can scroll up yourself you're
in the audience
you can scroll up and you can see you
know what what people have been saying
but not all these are things you know
i'm i'm in the middle of you know
um you know i i really just don't see
the point so someone made a comment here
4chan is cringe you know what i mean
like well what do you want me to say and
response to them you know
sometimes i have a lot to say you know
what i mean
i i don't i you know i'm in the middle
of explaining something about
ancient athens sometimes people you know
are asking questions or talking about
something relevant now if you've done
any of this reading if you have any
if you have anything meaningful to say
i'm happy to hear it
but you know what there were some
comments
here about the rapper uh little bee
you know i saw this stuff as happens i
mentioned the philippines
someone in the audience said i'm from
the philippines
that's nice to hear but like am i really
going to stop what i'm saying to read
that comment out and respond to it
if people are saying something
meaningful if people are saying
something challenging or asking a
question
i'm you know i'm happy to hear it i'm
happy to respond to it
but i don't really you know i
i just don't see the point of uh of this
kind of complaint
you know so anyway anyone who's got
anything to send in
you know by all means and you know sorry
again if you were here at the beginning
i mean with a long live stream like this
i realize most people in the audience
know we're not here when we first got
started
but i have been i've been stopping and
answering what's going on
all right shout out to uh shout out to
vitamin water who did not sponsor this
video
i got my coronavirus vaccination today
so what you are witnessing right now is
me under the uh
mind altering influence of both the
coronavirus vaccine
by pfizer also known as puffizer
and uh that completely legal street drug
that we hand out to children
chocolate that's that's probably as i i
did eat a small amount of vegan
chocolate
to help counteract the somewhat dizzying
effect of the uh
the vaccine
anyway so someone's saying isil is on
the jab that's the truth man i'm on the
jab and i'm i'm on the chocolate
so you guys don't know this movie i try
to have zero uh caffeine
uh in my diet and uh i try when i'm sick
or when i have jet lag i will drink
caffeine but
just recently well and i had coronavirus
i don't know if you guys remember that
but now
more than a year ago maybe a year and a
half ago i did actually i was sick for
28 days
so there have been times when i've just
given in and drink caffeine
but at the moment i'm trying to do zero
caffeine and if you do zero caffeine
that also means zero chocolate
but today i got the jab so i made an
excuse for myself and i ate
ate some vegan chocolate i'm both
suffering and enjoying
the uh the side effects of having eaten
chocolate
um okay we have a
this is the first time ever in the
history of the channel
someone has paid to make a comment some
of you know this melissa people can pay
and then their comment appears in a
brightly colored box so someone paid
five dollars
wow we do not know if those are us
dollars or canadian dollars
i'm gonna assume the u.s dollars fight
you just thanks man you just paid for my
vitamin
and he says quote hey guys i've been
watching you for years excellent videos
ha ha yeah i guess it doesn't need to be
introduction well look you know so i
just say that's not my
perspective my perspective is if you've
got something interesting to say
i'm going to stop and respond to it but
like look
i'm not saying this to insult my
audience let's be real not one person
said oh well when i read aristotle i
didn't see it that way
not one person said well you know i
actually differ
with your interpretation of pneuma
fustel de colange
and what he has to say about thucydides
and the differences between
roman and you know ancient greek poly
okay just just keep it real i'm keeping
it real with you you guys got to keep it
real with yourselves
there's you know during this period of
time there's been nothing really
in the audience for me to you know
respond it's fine i'm not i'm not here
to insult you guys
but don't insult me if i haven't like
stopped in the middle of saying that
something i think is really meaningful
and important and is the topic of the
video
when you know nobody in the audience is
providing with something you know really
challenging and on topic
and i have if you've been watching the
video i have several times stopped
just to just talk about things that are
off the topic so here just as an example
of a
relatively uh relatively substantive
comment somebody asks
what's your opinion on the greek
economic crisis
so if you do not know as diff
i hope i'm pronouncing your name
correctly we actually did go to greece
uh i was more than
not yet two years ago yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah 2019 late 2008
right and then we were there
when 2019 became 2020. were we there for
new york
right okay we were there around
christmas or something right no am i
wrong
okay okay right right right winter we
were there in late winter of 2019.
so we actually went to greece and you
know i
was expecting it to be
a third world country with first world
pretensions
and instead i found a first world
country with third world problems
you know what i mean um
[Music]
yeah you know it is it is certainly i
mean one of the problems with 21st
century politics
is that people can really kid themselves
about how serious political problems are
you know life as normal goes on so i
mean the economic crisis in greece
was very real and is very real but there
is still that veneer
of normalcy uh i would say in athens
especially or at least in athens
but i think for the whole country where
people can keep on living as normal as
if nothing's wrong there's nothing to
worry about
so i know that may not be what you were
expecting me to say i did
follow very closely the greek economic
crisis back in
2007 2008 2009 back in that era i was
very i was still interested in 2011
then i did a lot of research again um
you know i mean i guess the question i
would ask is
how bad do things have to get for people
to really go back to first principles
and start taking
political philosophy seriously you know
right now uh chile in south africa
they are writing a new sorry what did i
say
there you go thanks catch you on that
there's a little little verbal typo
chile in south america they're writing a
new constitution
now i'm not optimistic about the new
constitution sadly but i'm
i'm very happy that they are trying to
solve their problems by writing a new
constitution it's very important
and greece should have done that and
canada should do that in america a lot
of countries need to write a new
constitution
now in case you haven't heard in chile
it looks like the writing of the new
constitution is going to be controlled
by the communist party
they didn't get a majority of the votes
but they got a sort of plurality where
they have enough votes
to veto other people's suggestions or
decisions
we don't know how communist their new
constitution is going to be
maybe i'm being pessimistic it's going
to turn out great but it could be awful
or it could be mediocre
um but you know look life in chile is
wonderful
you know really the quality of life in
chile is better in quality of life in
canada i'm i'm not joking
certainly the quality of life for
indigenous people in chile is much
better than ferdicious people on campus
but i can live to hear many many ways
in which life in chile is better than
life in canada um
so how bad did things have to get how
radicalized or disconcented people have
to get in chile
before they rewrote the constitution you
know
now when i was living in perpignan
france which is right
on the border with spain spain had more
than 25
unemployment and youth unemployment was
about 50 percent
you know the spanish economy was a total
state of crisis and we we had economic
refugees
coming through birmingham there were
people leaving their lives in spain
coming to france they normally stay in
france for a short time
they'd say this is a terrible country
and they keep going to germany that was
generally they all they all ended up
going to germany maybe a few went to the
netherlands or something
but they were this kind of economic
refugee phenomena
and i asked all the time how bad do
things have to get
in you know in spain before people start
asking these questions coming up with
new answers
so i would likewise ask the question how
bad do things have to get in greece
before people really
ask fundamental questions and start
coming up with fundamentally new answers
and um you know i have i have a very low
opinion of my fellow canadians this way
i have certainly i mean it's partly out
of english culture
you know uh in england
doesn't matter i mean they're never
they're never going to go back to first
principles and really think it's never
going to happen you know in england
they'll never get off their ego trip of
believing they're the most wonderful
country in the world to live in the
things and they're the greatest place
on earth um it can be very
hard for a dissident minority
to shift the majority out of their
complacency to go back to the drawing
board and really
really ask the question what the hell
are we doing here like how does the
police system work
how does the university education system
work like what do we mean by equality
what do we mean by freedom like the
really basic fundamental questions about
how government is going to work and what
our priorities are too right sir
i'll just say this again i have a whole
video where i present this much more
dramatically but
oh yeah yeah we have millions and
millions of dollars to spend on
space exploration
when are the indigenous people gonna
have schools that are equally as good as
the white people
oh we don't have enough money for that
that's a really low priority
these things they just don't they just
don't endure scrutiny like just
any pinnix pnyx if you know the word
look it up you know any kind of really
direct democracy open sincerely
this is not going to end your scrutiny
you know like you know oh i mean america
we spend billions of dollars on
space exploration people in flint
michigan don't have drinking water like
yeah
yeah there are these kinds of problems
like guys if we just had
any kind of legitimate democracy look at
throughout the united states of america
but including
flint michigan people are expected to
pay 50 000
a year for their children to get a
university education
people are spending hundreds of
thousands of dollars in university
education this is a
huge crisis a huge problem so you know
obviously
there are political solutions there are
many ways there's not just one way to
solve this problem and i'm not even
going to tell you my way is the only way
or is the best way
of course i think my wife's better but
i'm just not going to say that
but you know regardless you know um
you know the lesson of the crisis in
greece
in 2008 you know i answered this
question
is that sadly a country can go through
this kind of uh trauma
this kind of calamity and nobody ever
asks
any of these questions you don't have
new questions you don't have new answers
and nothing changes
so you know the um how to say this you
know
the culture of complacency and yours
that's the tragic moral of the story for
2008 greece
to the 2008 crisis came and went and you
know
nothing changed so we have we have a
question that was i just mentioned i am
not
uh necessarily the source of censorship
someone just commented
i just joined you idiot and google
automatically censored that like google
deleted that and then i had to click to
undelete this i'm just giving an example
depending on your word choices uh the uh
you know the artificial stupidity of
google's artificial intelligence
system will censor you without me having
to uh having to click on anything
okay so babe do you want to say anything
i mean i'm i'm ready to wrap it up we've
covered
this has been uh compendious but not
brief you know
well maybe i should have said this in
the middle maybe after you want to come
around
okay
uh and you were talking about thucydides
so thucydides was
participating in the war yes and he was
actually exiled from
athens for approximately 20 years
i forgot that okay so he this is why he
had this
experience to inform him of the other
side
thucydides was exiled for 20 years wow
on yeah these are yeah yeah no i just
forgotten i'm sure i write it too with
some
people yeah i don't know everything
going in here
right so he was able to observe the
other side and i think for this reason
that's why he was i remember that there
was some going over the other side
yeah right or some exposure to the
spartan yeah but i guess in a way
like i have you know xenophon really was
on the other side he was really on the
smart side but
i i forgot that so you're telling me
thucydides really ended up
for 20 years okay yeah i either forgot
that or i
never knew it about these entities okay
cool cool i believe you
i'm looking at my notes i actually don't
have the book anymore that's how long
ago i read it
so um you know but i guess what i uh
wanted to say
is that i kind of have more respect for
somebody commenting on political and
historical circumstances surrounding a
war when they've
participated and you know earlier in
your
in your discussion of this you talked
about how most politicians in america
and judges for that matter uh
well most most uh politicians study law
you know that's the trajectory you know
you you go to university
study political science go to law school
and then you eventually
uh work as a politician and that's what
our representatives that's their
education
most i'm not saying that there aren't
any former military
members in congress or in senate but
i found this to be like a difference
between uh the people that were
the important voices of that time uh
and i i thought of uh lord chang as well
because he
participated in more as well um so yeah
this was
yeah this is something i i was thinking
that uh
is a difference i mean so
you know i think you can look at
political organization and political
philosophy
as starting with the military starting
with the need for
self-defense and the question of how
does the government pay for the military
how does the government provide a
military and who are military men and
who disciplines military men and who do
they have to do it
you can look at political organization
as a series of structures on top of the
military
as its fundamental basis and then yes
you would esteem someone like thucydides
and someone like lord chang in china
more than socrates for example right
right um i mean one suggestion
i'm making in this video is to instead
look at the fundamental
role of government even at a tribal
stage
even at the level of a tribe of nomads
not as being the military but as being
judgment as being the judge
um so you guys may not know this but the
british empire conquered
uh tribal peoples people living with
tribal mode of organization all over the
world
in africa and southeast asia and you
know out in the remote areas of what's
now myanmar
then british burma and stuff you know
the main interaction between those
people and the government
was judgment um they didn't need
government
like they were very self-reliant they
you know they didn't live in our quality
of life but they made their own clothes
they hunted they farmed they provided
everything they needed for themselves in
life
they didn't expect the government to
provide them with uh
an education or health care they did not
accept
any concept that the government would
provide them with medicine or something
right
but there would be conflicts within
those tribes
yes it could be something as simple as
murder i honestly doubt it would be
something because with murder it's kind
of straightforward
but there would be some conflict people
trapped and they would voluntarily they
would get the partisans
okay let's go to the british governor
let's go let's go
they would call it government house
that's a real british empire tradition
how they go to government house and
let's ask for
judgment we will present our complaints
you know against one another
and government will you know the
governor or the government
will judge us now i admit this is a
holotype this is just
one unique example um
but i think whenever you look at tribal
societies and ancient societies
the even children in a schoolyard like
there are children in a schoolyard they
have a dispute or they have a conflict
and they say okay let's go and ask the
teacher let's go ask the school
principal
to rule over us to make a judgment you
know
i think that is a very fundamental
aspect of government that we we
kind of build up uh from there i think
that's kind of the one proposal of many
i have in this video
now when you look at it that way
most of the world china india
arabia to be one you know the muslim
world which now it grew way past
arabia but arabia iraq iran
you know the the central part of the
muslim world um
you get a very simple answer to who is a
judge
who is in charge you know what i mean
who rules and who is ruled
and it is brutal in its simplicity right
and part of what's special that you know
we see in thucydides thucydides isn't
even boasting about it he isn't
presented as a good thing because
thucydides is a harsh critic of
democracy
is that in ancient athens you have a
totally different answer
right so in ancient athens you have a
culture which again
even in the theater you know uh even in
sports
there's this idea of the audience voting
so the idea of the audience is already
significant right
and anyone can be in the audience not
slaves
but almost anyone you know like there
are some limits but that
everyone and anyone should be prepared
to step up and do their duty as a
citizen and
vote in the arts this is profound right
and then who is a judge
that this is an anonymous and
interchangeable person assigned at
random
assigned by law that's a profoundly
alien concept from any other culture in
the world
china never thought the judge should be
chosen at random japan never thought
that you know
again i you can look at mesoamerica
pre-contact
south america or central america or
something right and again if you look at
islamic jurisprudence or something right
the ancient buddhist world the ancient
muslim world none of them have this
this kind wow so that's really different
right and then obviously
coming out of voting you also get
elections i mean voting
for guilty versus innocent or voting for
who is correct in a dispute between two
parties because it could be a civil case
a lawsuit
not necessarily a crime okay voting and
this kind of
equality through anonymity and
interchangeability
and again the equality it isn't passive
it's produced by our education
aristotle puts a lot of emphasis and by
our military service
we all serve the military we all take
responsibility together for the res
publica you know republic is just red's
public for this public thing you know
we all take our share on that and then
out of that you start to get these other
you know democratic elements um
you know now okay i'll just briefly
argue against myself
i think armchair academics
it's easy for them to overlook the
brutality of ancient peoples
in this culture and the military is a
huge part of that yes sir do you want to
say more i mean
yeah i mean yeah it's filled with
massacres basically you know uh once a
once an area is conquered you know they
kill
a lot of a lot of innocent people and uh
enslave
innocent people and yeah so i i
definitely
took note of that throughout reading it
that it's the ancient world
despite uh the positives about ancient
athenian society
despite the these uh civilized
aspects of it there was definitely and
piracy
was common and yeah
well i mean you know in general um
learning from the past forces us to
confront
the brutality of the past now you know
these were not societies that had a
professionalized army
again this is really part of the origin
of democracy
everyone should be in the army if you're
not a or something you're not
physically crippled
you know everyone's a soldier everyone
fights for the republic
that's the greek idea it's also the
roman idea to a certain extent
admittedly we could rome it's not as
perfect an example
right but in athens you know everyone
has done military service
and actually one of the forms of
corruption in rome
which then continues on into the united
states america you know in its early
colonial days with the draft and so on
and so
is the idea that you could pay money to
avoid doing military service
say okay well i will pay like a hundred
thousand dollars to be a significant
money
for another man to do military service
on my behalf
and that happened during the american
revolution there were rich men who paid
money
to not fight against the british they
were furnishing money that could be used
to fight against
yeah yeah to get a paid deferment this
way
you know in the napoleonic wars and
stuff that idea hangs on a long time
that well my money fights for me
you know the people of certain socialism
but no i mean in athens
this is the unifying element but yeah in
my recent critique of uh
weeholt and the other books i've been
reading about uh american political
history american constitution and
revolution and so on
something comes up and again just when
i'm talking to melissa stuff it's like
you know
you can't forget you can't ignore the
brutality of these people
these were people who had committed
torture with their own hands they
committed
murder with their own hands they had
whipped slaves
they had participated and like you know
they they had the experience
of war and of tremendous violence and
peace time
that today is highly professionalized
now i mean some of you guys you might
have picked up about on this movie i am
relatively sympathetic towards
the cia i am not one of these guys who
kind of blames the cia for anything i
know the cia kills people
you know what i mean uh i think you know
again when you
see it in this more centuries-long
millennia-long
way looking over time you can see like
oh
these are the parts of our society that
are still carrying on that ancient
brutality
like now there's a small professional
service
that engages in subterfuge and
skullduggery and
murder frankly i'm not any other word
for it you know like
okay so the cia those are the these are
this small number of professionals who
are still living that way
but no um yeah when you were looking at
an ancient and so on the brutality of
that
and sir there's something else again
this i've talked about most before
you can't underestimate the element of
risk and threat
in participating in those democratic
forums uh people weren't just
people weren't just shy
when people stood up to speak at the
pinex
they were risking their lives so that
was that was different from
you know speaking in the theater if you
were going to speak in a real political
debate
i would i would say this is true of rome
too frankly to some extent
but you were you were putting your neck
on the line and if you lied
or seemed dishonest or made statements
didn't make any sense i
mean it wouldn't just be a reputation
that suffered you could physically
suffer consequences uh
if if you were again even if you weren't
actually
uh a corrupt or dishonest person in
politics but if you were perceived to be
that could have have terrible
consequences for you
so the if the audience uh demanded the
selfie you know that's that's another
thing
okay guys so from my perspective i'm
coming to the end of this uh
live stream um
i started by typing out the the title
and i think we have
fulfilled the remit of the subject being
uh
being discussed in the title and again a
spontaneous
uh discussion but it's a spontaneous
discussion things that melissa's been
reading about for
three years and i've been reading about
for i don't know how many decades
with thucydides itself so i guess i
should finish that story i started
telling the story of how i first
heard about the cities there's a
wonderful photograph of me lying with my
daughter
on my chest my infant newborn daughter
on my chest and the first time i read
thucydides it was really on my list of
things to get around
to for a couple years not for that many
years
but it was when my daughter was a
newborn baby so when my daughter was a
newborn baby and i was holding her i
read
thucydides and that was uh you can see
in the picture it's not that thick a
book
it's um an edited down version of the
text that was my first version of the
text
then later i did read the whole text and
i listened to it as an audio book
uh at that time also and take care of my
daughter i listened to the whole of
herodotus
not netted now read the complete
unexplored test of herodotus i listened
to as an audiobook
mostly when cleaning so you know my
daughter would fall asleep all the time
so you'd
walk the baby she'd fall asleep she was
asleep you'd put her down you put on the
audiobook start cleaning or maybe
cooking
but cooking or cleaning and stuff baby
wake up go back and play with the baby
you know
this kind of thing so actually for me uh
both thucydides and herodotus
that's linked to my experience of caring
for my daughter uh during her first year
of life
and i mean at the time i remember saying
to mexico i was like
my whole life would be different if i
had read this earlier
you know if i'd read this when i was in
high school or something everything
would be different for me
uh thucydides especially but you know
putting together thucydides and products
and now of course it's funny i
you know i read i read those things
as an old man with my daughter americans
at a stage when i already had all this
other political knowledge some
it's been discussed this year i didn't
do about china and india and southeast
asia and
all kinds and i knew about the french
revolution and you know i knew about all
kinds of stuff in in politics and i
already read a lot of stuff from ancient
greece and ancient rome too i read
aristotle and all kinds of other sources
but
you know it was uh in some ways
inspiring and in some ways saddening to
reflect on how different my whole life
would have been if i had read through
cities back
when i was a teenager and what what
different decisions i made
and it leads you to have you know an
appreciation for
the topic of this video what is
uh uniquely important about this
cultural political and philosophy
philosophical legacy of the west